so why feeling oh i love this why
feeling self-pity feels good so after
two years of therapy i managed to
improve and get rid of anxiety and
depression and life is amazing like look
at that there we go so stay in therapy
kids
one of the things that i learn and that
still puzzle me is to stop self-pity
even though in short term it feels good
sometimes i just feel in my brain that i
want to feel miserable this happens way
less often now and thinking that i'm
miserable feels good saying to myself
that i'm unlovable feels good now when i
feel this i
use effort to fight this feeling either
by ignoring it or finding counter
evidence of why i'm level lovable and
not worth the pity and why when i do
this it hurts but makes my makes but
long-term makes my life great why does
this happen it doesn't make any sense
also when indulging in this
self-pityness that feels good to imagine
others feeling sorry for myself but it
only feels good as long as it's not real
this is so good
okay so first of all huge props so to
this poster because of the
specificity of like what they're
discovering right
if i imagine other people feeling sorry
for myself it feels good but if people
actually feel sorry for me it feels bad
like what's up with that
why does the fantasy not mirror up to
the reality
thinking i'm miserable feels good
but saying to myself that i'm unlovable
also feels good
and sometimes i fight it but when i
fight it
it hurts
like what's up with that okay
there's a lot of really good stuff here
so let's start at the top
the first thing is that our brain is not
designed to
feel good it's designed to like
understand things and like put things in
order okay so what i mean by that is
that like the brain seeks to bring
order from chaos it's all about like
generating patterns so that we can
understand and make sense of the world
the brain would rather generate a bad
pattern that makes us feel bad rather
than have chaos and confusion okay this
is a really important thing to
understand
so if you look at people who get into
abusive relationships over and over and
over again like why on earth do they do
this okay it's really it's an
interesting question is really
fascinating once you understand it
so
in the mind of someone who
has been in abusive relationships they
have low value okay so like i'm a bad
person i deserve to be treated like crap
right so we just saw a post about a
bunch of shame so i'm like really
ashamed of myself like i suck at life
i'm a pos
so then what happens is they like date
two people so one person treats them
like a pos and somehow like they wind up
with that person so like what's up with
that like how does that happen and it's
because the world is congruent right so
the way that i feel about myself
other people are treating me the way
that i i should they should treat me
because it's the way that i feel about
myself so the world makes sense things
are very orderly let's stick with that
it's the same reason that like people
who are like you know super narcissistic
will surround themselves by like
yes men or like other people who will
support their narcissism i'm the best
thing since sliced bread so i'm gonna
engage in relationships who help me feel
about myself the way that i feel okay so
actually it's slightly different
narcissism because
you're looking at people to assuage your
internal insecurity but let's not go
there for now the key thing is that
human beings will prefer
order
or a pattern that makes sense to a good
pattern
and even if you look at people in
abusive relation who have a history of
abusive relationships or history of
trauma if they enter into a healthy
relationship
if you actually talk to them they don't
say oh wow this person is treating me
like amazing like this feels great i
never realized how much self self-worth
i have i never realized what i was worth
that's not actually their experience
their experience is terrifying and
confusing they're like what on earth is
going on like i was sick
and this person like took care of me
like what are they what am i missing
because like i'm not worth taking care
of like or is this a scam of some way
like i'm waiting for the other
shoe to drop like what's going on like
what is this person what's happening
here i'm confused i don't like it it
makes me uncomfortable i dislike it
and because then if i don't care about
myself and someone else starts caring
about me like how does that make me feel
it actually is very discongruent and
like i don't like it
right it's like something's missing it
doesn't i'm not used to this
we pick we prefer as human beings what
we're used to over things that are good
right and this is explains like half of
our problems is that we prefer the
familiar to the good
so what happens in the mind of this
person is like if we look at the abusive
person is when they when they you know
date someone who's like abusive that's
totally fine like it makes sense even
though it hurts emotionally like at
least it makes sense and i know i've
survived this it's totally fine it's far
more terrifying to actually date someone
who treats you with like respect because
then you're like what do i what do i do
about this i'm so confused like i don't
know how to behave in this relationship
it's bewildering and it's scary
because here's the really scary thing
that then happens
is there's a part of them that over time
starts to believe and they're like oh my
god
is it possible that i'm worth something
and then
comes the test
because
if there's a possibility that i'm worth
something and i continue in this
relationship
and it turns out and then the other shoe
does drop it was a scam if i let myself
hope and this person turns out to be an
abusive just like everyone else
then i hoped and my hopes are completely
shattered
so something really bizarre happens is
people start to hope they actually as
they start to be convinced that maybe
they're wrong they actually pull away
from the relationship because the idea
that you could be wrong is like so scary
and devastating you never want to put it
to the test it's really terrifying
and then if if that shoe drops then
you're defeated for the rest of your
life because you you thought for a
moment that you had value and boy did
they prove you wrong okay
so the first thing to understand is that
the mind prefers the familiar
over the good okay and we like we like
seek things that are congruent with the
way that we feel about ourselves so
enter this now our case of like someone
who feels self-pity and is kind of like
doing well in life right
so i want you to understand there's like
an echo left over of the self-pity so
two years ago before you went into
therapy
you pitied yourself right because you
were like oh so sad so sad bro like oh
my god or girl like so sad
and so like you recognize that you
deserve pity and and so like you learned
how to like comfort yourself right and
that's like a thing that has lingered
that you learned how to comfort yourself
you learned how to tell yourself hey
like oh my god it's so sad like you
deserve so much pity like oh like you
can't you're not really capable of
anything because that that was a that
was a solution for you right it was a
way that you dealt with some of your
problems and as we get healthy we no
longer need that solution but it still
arises from time to time right like so
the brain doesn't forget everything all
at once like if i haven't spoken a
language in a decade i still remember a
few words i still sometimes think about
it from time to time that's just how our
brain works
and so the first thing to understand is
that you know it's an echo like it's
okay
like
that you feel self-pity and it's also
okay for you to indulge in it from time
to time
because it kind of feels good right it
feels congruent that's why it feels good
by the way it's not healthy but it feels
congruent
so here's what i'd recommend if you're
kind of in this situation now is don't
always push it away
right like notice what it is and notice
that it was your friend for a while and
it helped you for a while and it helped
you survive some dark times and so it's
coming to visit from time to time you
don't really need its help anymore
you know like
you know your life is pretty good
um but that it's still allowed to come
there from time to time you don't always
have to push it away you don't always
have to tell yourself that
you don't always have to shout it down
so this is what i'd say in terms of like
internal self-dialogue the next time you
feel like pitting yourself and you say
to yourself i don't deserve the pity
that is very devaluing or invalidating
towards that feeling right like if if
someone is feeling self
pity and i tell them hey screw you you
don't deserve to pity yourself look at
everything that you've got you you're
such a whiny little stop doing
that
that's like not gonna make the person
feel good right it's incredibly
invalidating which is what you're doing
yourself which is why it feels bad
so instead what you need to do is like
notice it and say like hey like i
understand that you know there's a part
of me that feels self-pity like i've i
carried that pity around for a long time
it's an old friend
and it's coming to visit and that's okay
i i've grown a lot i don't actually
believe that i need that much pity
but i certainly needed a lot of pity a
couple of years ago and so like it's
fine for me to feel this way like it's
okay for me to feel this way and i'll
probably continue to feel this way from
time to time and that's okay like
you know because
there was a period of my life where it
seemed like i needed
a lot of compassion and pity i was
hungry for it and i didn't get it from
other people which is the other thing
you can kind of explore
and so if you were hungry for that
compassion from some time ago and like
now you're clearly not going to get that
compassion because your life is better
good job by the way
then that hunger will be left over right
it's like that desire will will be left
unfulfilled and so it's coming back and
it's giving you an opportunity to like
fill it so go ahead and fill it and fill
it with awareness don't dive too far
into self-pity but by all means like be
compassionate towards it and like
indulge in it a little bit and and
recognize that okay is today a day that
i'm going to indulge don't indulge in it
every day right so you don't want to
kind of slide back but it's okay for it
to be there because you haven't had a
need that left was met unmet
i mean it was not met and if you have an
unmet need it's going to linger with you
and it's just kind of psychologically
popping up like hey remember me we used
to be good friends and so let it be
there treat it with compassion it'll
melt away over time don't worry about it